Added docs for handling automated sync PRs (#299)
nf-core/nf-co.re: markdown/developers/sync.md

subtitle: Learn how nf-core pipelines are automatically kept up to date with community standards.
---

# Introduction
To keep all the nf-core pipelines up-to-date with the latest version of the community standards, we have implemented a synchronisation tool.
This ensures that updates to the community standards are propagated to all the nf-core pipelines.

There are three topics covered in this documentation page:

1. [Merging automated PRs](#merging-automated-prs)
2. [Manual synchronisation](#manual-synchronisation)
3. [Setting up a pipeline for syncing retrospectively](#setting-up-a-pipeline-for-syncing-retrospectively)

### How template synchronisation works

> The `nf-core` helper tools have a subcommand for synchronising a pipeline with the nf-core template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `nf-core` helper tools have a subcommand for synchronising a pipeline with the nf-core template i.e. `nf-core sync`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The `nf-core` helper tools have a subcommand for synchronising a pipeline with the nf-core template (`nf-core sync`).
```

Although this can be run manually, it is usually only used by the GitHub Actions automation:

> when a new version of nf-core/tools is released it runs for all nf-core pipelines and automatically opens pull-requests (PRs) with the necessary changes to every pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when a new version of `nf-core/tools` is released it runs for all nf-core pipelines and automatically opens pull-requests (PRs) with the necessary changes required to update every pipeline.
```

> These pull requests then need to be manually dealt with by the pipeline maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These pull requests then need to be manually resolved and merged by the pipeline maintainers.
```

Behind the scenes, this synchronisation is done by using `git`.

> Each repository has a special `TEMPLATE` branch which contains only the "vanilla" code made by the create tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each repository has a special `TEMPLATE` branch which contains only the "vanilla" code made by the `nf-core create` tool.
```

> The synchronisation tool fetches the variables needed for a pipeline and uses this to trigger a `nf-core create --no-git` command with the latest version of the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The synchronisation tool fetches the essential variables needed to recreate the pipeline and uses this to trigger a `nf-core create --no-git` command with the latest version of the template.
```

The result from this is then compared against what is stored in the `TEMPLATE` branch and committed.

> When merging from the `TEMPLATE` branch back in to the main `dev` branch of the pipeline, `git` should be clever enough to know what has been changed since the template was first used, and only present the relevant changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When merging from the `TEMPLATE` branch back into the main `dev` branch of the pipeline, `git` should be clever enough to know what has changed since the template was first used, and therefore, it will only present the relevant changes.
```

> For this to work in practice, the `TEMPLATE` branch needs to have a shared git history with the `master` branch of the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this to work in practice, the `TEMPLATE` branch needs to have a shared `git` history with the `master` branch of the pipeline.
```

> The `nf-core create` command arranges this by enforcing a first commit to the `master` branch before any development has taken place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `nf-core create` command initially does this by enforcing a first commit to the `master` branch before any development has taken place.
```

If the pipeline *was not* created by the `nf-core create` command, this has to be set up manually.
For instructions on this, see [Setting up a pipeline for syncing retrospectively](#setting-up-a-pipeline-for-syncing-retrospectively).

# Merging automated PRs

> When a new release of tools is created, each pipeline will get an automated pull-request (PR) opened to merge the changes to the template in to the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new release of tools is created, each pipeline will get an automated pull-request (PR) opened to merge the changes to the template into the pipeline.
```

If there are no merge conflicts on the PR, then that's great!

> If you're are happy with the changes, feel free to just merge it in to the `dev` branch directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are happy with the changes, feel free to just merge it into the `dev` branch directly.
```

Author: I have noticed myself writing in to instead of into a lot recently, something strange happening in my brain...

However, it is quite likely that the PR is quite big with a lot of merge conflicts.

> You're going to have to merge these manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're going to have to resolve and merge these manually.
```

Sorry about this, but there's no way around it..

You should not be actively working on the main nf-core repository, so we need to bring these changes to your personal fork.
The steps we need to do are:

1. Pull the `nf-core/<pipeline>` `TEMPLATE` changes to your fork
2. Resolve the merge conflicts
3. Push these updates to your fork on GitHub
4. Make a PR from your fork to the main nf-core repo

> Once you have merged this PR from your fork, this PR will automatically show as merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have committed and pushed the updates to your fork this PR will automatically show as merged.
```

Author: Not quite - the PR from the fork has to be merged in to the nf-core repository. Just committing and pushing to your fork won't do anything..

```suggestion
Once you have commited and pushed the updates to your fork and merged these in to the nf-core repository, the automated PR will close itself and show as merged.
```

    both modified:   docs/usage.md
    both modified:   environment.yml
    both modified:   main.nf
    both modified:   nextflow.config
```

You now need to go through each of these files to resolve every merge conflict.
Most code editors have tools to help with this, for example [Atom](https://flight-manual.atom.io/using-atom/sections/github-package/#resolve-conflicts) and [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/versioncontrol#_merge-conflicts) have built-in support.

Be careful when resolving conflicts.
Most of the time you will want to use the version from the `TEMPLATE` branch,
but be aware that some of this new template code may need to be customised by your pipeline.
In other words, you may need to manually combine the two versions in to one new code block.

If you have any doubts, ask for help on the nf-core Slack.

### Pushing the resolved changes to your fork

When all merge conflicts have been resolved and all files are staged, you can commit and push these changes as with any other new code:

```bash
git commit -m "Merged changes from nf-core template"
git push --set-upstream origin merging-template-updates
```

### Merging to the nf-core repository

> Once the changes are on your fork, you can make a pull request to the main nf-core fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the changes are on your fork, you can make a pull request to the main nf-core repository for the pipeline.
```
